.TH MUXM 1 "2026-03-22" "MuxMaster v1.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
muxm \- Universal DV/HLG/HDR10/SDR video encoder/muxer with format profiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B muxm
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fB\-\-\fR] \fIsource\fR [\fItarget\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
MuxMaster converts and muxes video for various playback targets including
Apple TV direct play, Plex/Jellyfin streaming, archival storage, animation
workflows, and universal compatibility. It handles Dolby Vision
(extract/convert/inject), HDR/HLG/SDR color handling, tone-mapping HDR to
SDR, audio selection/transcoding, and subtitle selection with optional
PGS\(->SRT OCR.
.PP
Configuration layers (lowest to highest precedence):
.PP
Defaults \(-> /etc/.muxmrc \(-> ~/.muxmrc \(-> ./.muxmrc \(-> \-\-profile \(-> CLI flags
.PP
.B muxm
requires
.B bash 4.3
or later. macOS ships bash\ 3.2; install a modern version
(e.g.,
.BR "brew install bash" )
and ensure it appears first in
.BR PATH .
.SH FORMAT PROFILES
Profiles are named presets that configure muxm for a specific use case in a
single flag. Every setting a profile changes can be individually overridden
with CLI flags.
.TP
.BR \-\-profile " " NAME
Apply a named format profile.
.PP
.\" NOTE: Profile names below must match VALID_PROFILES in muxm (Section 2).
Available profiles:
.TP
.B dv\-archival
Preserve DV + HDR10 + all audio and subtitle tracks (multi\-track, copy
only). MKV. Commentary/descriptive audio tracks dropped by default.
Audio filterable via
.BR AUDIO_LANG_PREF " and " AUDIO_KEEP_COMMENTARY ;
subtitles filterable via
.BR SUB_LANG_PREF ", " SUB_INCLUDE_FORCED / FULL / SDH ", and " SUB_MAX_TRACKS .
Skip if already ideal. JSON report.
.TP
.B hdr10\-hq
Strip DV, keep HDR10. HEVC CRF 17, preset slower. Lossless audio +
stereo fallback. MKV.
.TP
.B atv\-directplay\-hq
Apple TV Direct Play. MP4, HEVC Main10, DV P8.1, E\-AC\-3 audio,
AAC stereo fallback, burn forced subs.
.TP
.B streaming
Modern HEVC streaming. CRF 20, preset medium, E\-AC\-3 448k, AAC stereo.
MP4. Targets Plex/Jellyfin on Shield, Fire TV, Roku, smart TVs, web.
.TP
.B animation
Anime/cartoon optimized. HEVC CRF 16, 10\-bit (even SDR),
animation\-tuned x265 (low psy\-rd, adjusted deblock, extra b\-frames),
lossless audio, multi\-track subs (ASS/SSA + PGS bitmap). MKV.
.TP
.B universal
Play anywhere. H.264 SDR (tone\-map HDR), AAC stereo, burn forced subs,
strip chapters/metadata. MP4.
.SH COMMON OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show condensed usage and available profiles.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version.
.TP
.BR \-\-dry\-run
Plan steps without encoding/muxing (creates placeholders only).
.TP
.BR \-\-print\-effective\-config
Show the resolved configuration after all sources merge, then exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-setup
Run full first\-time setup: installs dependencies, the manual page, and
tab completion in a single command. Equivalent to running
\fB\-\-install\-dependencies\fR, \fB\-\-install\-man\fR, and
\fB\-\-install\-completions\fR in sequence.
.TP
.BR \-\-install\-dependencies
Check and install required/optional tools via Homebrew and pipx.
.TP
.BR \-\-install\-man
Install this manual page to the system man directory. Uses sudo if the
target directory is not writable. Detects Homebrew prefix automatically.
.TP
.BR \-\-uninstall\-man
Remove the installed manual page.
.TP
.BR \-\-install\-completions
Install bash/zsh tab\-completion to \fI~/.muxm/\fR and add a
\fBsource\fR line to the user's shell RC files
(\fI~/.bashrc\fR, \fI~/.bash_profile\fR, \fI~/.zshrc\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-uninstall\-completions
Remove the tab\-completion file from \fI~/.muxm/\fR and clean
the \fBsource\fR lines from shell RC files.
.TP
.BR \-\-create\-config " " \fISCOPE\fR " " [\fIPROFILE\fR]
Generate a \fI.muxmrc\fR config file at the location specified by \fISCOPE\fR
and exit. Profile\-specific variables are uncommented and set; all other
variables are commented with defaults.
.RS
.TP
.B system
writes to \fI/etc/.muxmrc\fR (may require sudo)
.TP
.B user
writes to \fI~/.muxmrc\fR
.TP
.B project
writes to \fI$PWD/.muxmrc\fR
.RE
.IP
\fIPROFILE\fR defaults to \fBatv\-directplay\-hq\fR if omitted.
Refuses to overwrite an existing file; use \fB\-\-force\-create\-config\fR
to overwrite.
.TP
.BR \-\-force\-create\-config " " \fISCOPE\fR " " [\fIPROFILE\fR]
Same as \fB\-\-create\-config\fR but overwrites an existing file.
.SH VIDEO OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-crf " " \fIN\fR
Video quality CRF (lower = higher quality). Typical: 16\(en22.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-preset " " \fINAME\fR
Encoder preset: ultrafast \fIto\fR placebo. Default: slower.
.TP
.BR \-\-video\-codec " " libx265|libx264
Video encoder. Default: libx265.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-level " " \fIN\fR
x265 level\-idc (e.g., 5.1).
.TP
.BR \-\-x265\-params " " \fISTR\fR
Advanced x265 parameter string.
.TP
.BR \-\-tonemap " , " \-\-no\-tonemap
Enable/disable HDR/HLG to SDR tone\-mapping.
.TP
.BR \-\-sdr\-force\-10bit " , " \-\-no\-sdr\-force\-10bit
Force/don't force 10\-bit output for SDR sources regardless of source bit
depth. Useful for animation where 8\-bit sources cause visible banding in
gradients. Default: disabled (follow source bit depth).
.TP
.BR \-\-video\-copy\-if\-compliant " , " \-\-no\-video\-copy\-if\-compliant
Copy/re\-encode video stream when source already matches target profile.
.TP
.BR \-\-max\-copy\-bitrate " " \fIRATE\fR
Maximum average bitrate for
.B \-\-video\-copy\-if\-compliant
to accept a stream copy. Sources exceeding this value are re\-encoded.
Uses ffprobe\(aqs reported bitrate when available, falling back to
.RI ( file_size\~\[mu]\~8\~/\~duration ).
Format: number with k suffix (e.g.,
.BR 50000k ).
Empty (default) disables the check.
.TP
.BR \-\-dv " , " \-\-no\-dv
Enable or disable Dolby Vision extraction/injection. Use \fB\-\-dv\fR to
re\-enable DV handling after a profile disables it (e.g., \fBanimation\fR).
.TP
.BR \-\-allow\-dv\-fallback " , " \-\-no\-allow\-dv\-fallback
If DV handling fails, fall back to non\-DV output (default) or hard\-fail.
.TP
.BR \-\-dv\-convert\-p81 " , " \-\-no\-dv\-convert\-p81
Enable/disable automatic conversion to DV Profile 8.1 when native DV
injection fails. Default: enabled.
.TP
.BR \-\-conservative\-vbv " , " \-\-no\-conservative\-vbv
Enable/disable VBV guardrails that cap bitrate and buffer size per x265
level. Default: enabled.
.TP
.BR \-\-threads " " \fIN\fR
Number of threads for ffmpeg encoding.
.SH AUDIO OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-track " " \fIN\fR
Select specific audio stream index (0\-based).
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-lang\-pref " " \fILIST\fR
Preferred audio languages (comma\-separated, e.g., eng,spa).
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-force\-codec " " \fICODEC\fR
Force all audio to a specific codec (e.g., aac).
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-lossless\-passthrough " , " \-\-no\-audio\-lossless\-passthrough
Allow/disallow lossless codecs (TrueHD, DTS\-HD MA, FLAC) to copy through.
.TP
.BR \-\-stereo\-fallback " , " \-\-no\-stereo\-fallback
Enable/disable automatic AAC stereo track when primary >2ch.
.TP
.BR \-\-stereo\-bitrate " " \fIRATE\fR
Stereo track bitrate (e.g., 192k).
.TP
.BR \-\-audio\-titles " , " \-\-no\-audio\-titles
Generate/suppress descriptive titles for audio streams
(e.g., \(lq5.1 Surround (E\-AC\-3)\(rq). Default: enabled.
.SS Audio Track Selection
When multiple audio streams exist, muxm scores each track and selects the highest.
Factors (in order of weight): language match against
.BR AUDIO_LANG_PREF ,
channel count, surround bonus (\[>=]6ch), codec preference order, and bitrate
(tie\-break). Tracks whose title contains "commentary", "descriptive", or
similar keywords receive a penalty
.RB ( AUDIO_SCORE_COMMENTARY_PENALTY ).
.PP
Scoring weights are configurable via
.IR .muxmrc :
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_LANG_BONUS " (default 150),"
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_CHANNEL_MULTIPLIER " (default 20),"
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_SURROUND_BONUS " (default 30),"
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_COMMENTARY_PENALTY " (default 200)."
.PP
Language preference is the strongest signal by default, ensuring that a
preferred\-language stereo track beats a foreign surround track. Reduce
.B AUDIO_SCORE_LANG_BONUS
to ~25 to prefer higher channel counts regardless of language.
.SS Multi\-Track Audio (Archival)
The
.B dv\-archival
profile uses multi\-track mode
.RB ( AUDIO_MULTI_TRACK=1 ),
which keeps all audio tracks that pass a subtractive filter instead of
scoring and selecting one. All surviving tracks are stream\-copied from
source (never transcoded). No stereo fallback is created.
.PP
Filters (configured via
.IR .muxmrc ):
.TP
.B AUDIO_LANG_PREF
When non\-empty, only tracks whose language matches the comma\-separated
list are kept. When empty (the default for
.BR dv\-archival ),
all languages pass.
.TP
.B AUDIO_KEEP_COMMENTARY
When 0 (the
.B dv\-archival
default), tracks whose title matches commentary or audio\-description
keywords are dropped. Set to 1 to keep them.
.PP
Multi\-track mode is automatically demoted to single\-track if
.B \-\-audio\-track
or
.B \-\-audio\-force\-codec
is set on the CLI (the explicit flag wins).
.SH SUBTITLE OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-subtitles
Disable all subtitle processing.
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-lang\-pref " " \fILIST\fR
Preferred subtitle languages (comma\-separated).
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-burn\-forced " , " \-\-no\-sub\-burn\-forced
Burn/don't burn forced subtitles into the video stream.
.TP
.BR \-\-clear\-default\-subs " , " \-\-no\-clear\-default\-subs
Clear default subtitle flags in MP4/MOV output using MP4Box to prevent
players from auto-enabling full/SDH subtitles.
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-export\-external " , " \-\-no\-sub\-export\-external
Export/embed subtitles as external .srt files.
.IP
.BR Note :
When combined with
.BR \-\-sub\-burn\-forced ,
players that auto\-load .srt sidecars with matching filenames (VLC, some
smart TVs) will display both the burned forced subtitles and the loaded
external track, resulting in doubled text for foreign\-dialogue segments.
Use
.B \-\-no\-sub\-export\-external
if targeting these players.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-sub\-sdh
Exclude SDH/HI subtitle tracks.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-ocr
Disable PGS\(->SRT OCR.
.TP
.BR \-\-sub\-preserve\-format " , " \-\-no\-sub\-preserve\-format
Preserve/convert native text subtitle formats (ASS/SSA).
When enabled and the output container is MKV, ASS/SSA subtitles are
stream\-copied in their native format, preserving positioning, fonts,
and typesetting. When disabled (or when the output container is MP4/MOV),
ASS/SSA subtitles are converted to plain\-text SRT.
The
.B animation
profile enables this by default.
.TP
.BR \-\-ocr\-tool " " \fITOOL\fR
OCR backend: pgsrip or sub2srt.
.TP
.BR \-\-ocr\-lang " " \fILANG\fR
OCR language (default: eng).
.SS Multi\-Track Subtitles
The
.B dv\-archival
and
.B animation
profiles use multi\-track subtitle mode
.RB ( SUB_MULTI_TRACK=1 ),
which keeps all subtitle tracks that pass a subtractive filter instead of
selecting one per type. Surviving tracks are stream\-copied from
source (no OCR, no intermediate files). The one exception is ASS/SSA
tracks when
.B SUB_PRESERVE_TEXT_FORMAT
is 0 (or the output container is MP4/MOV): these are converted inline
to SRT or mov_text respectively. All other codecs (PGS, SRT, VobSub)
are always stream\-copied.
.PP
Filters (configured via
.IR .muxmrc ):
.TP
.B SUB_LANG_PREF
When non\-empty, only tracks whose language matches the comma\-separated
list are kept. When empty (the default for
.BR dv\-archival ),
all languages pass.
.TP
.B SUB_INCLUDE_FORCED / SUB_INCLUDE_FULL / SUB_INCLUDE_SDH
Type filters. When 0, tracks of that type are excluded. All three
default to 1 in both
.B dv\-archival
and
.BR animation .
.TP
.B SUB_MAX_TRACKS
Maximum number of subtitle tracks to keep (applied after all other
filters as a cap). Defaults to 99 for
.BR dv\-archival ,
6 for
.BR animation .
.PP
Bitmap subtitles (PGS, VobSub) that cannot be muxed into the target
container (e.g., PGS into MP4) are silently skipped. Both
.B dv\-archival
and
.B animation
use MKV, which handles all subtitle formats.
.PP
Multi\-track subtitle mode is automatically demoted to single\-track if
.B \-\-sub\-burn\-forced
is set on the CLI (burn\-in requires extracting and processing a single
forced track).
.SH OUTPUT OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-output\-ext " " \fIEXT\fR
Output container: mp4|m4v|mov|mkv. Default: mp4.
.TP
.BR \-\-keep\-chapters " , " \-\-no\-keep\-chapters
Keep/strip chapter markers.
.TP
.BR \-\-strip\-metadata " , " \-\-no\-strip\-metadata
Strip/keep non\-essential metadata.
.TP
.BR \-\-profile\-comment " , " \-\-no\-profile\-comment
Embed/suppress profile tagline in container comment metadata. Default: on.
When a profile is active, a short descriptive comment is written to the
output container's comment field (MP4 \(cocmt, MKV COMMENT).
.TP
.BR \-\-skip\-if\-ideal " , " \-\-no\-skip\-if\-ideal
Skip processing if source already matches profile requirements.
.TP
.BR \-\-report\-json " , " \-\-no\-report\-json
Generate/suppress JSON report alongside output.
.TP
.BR \-\-checksum " , " \-\-no\-checksum
Write/suppress SHA\-256 checksum for final output.
.TP
.BR \-K ", " \-\-keep\-temp\-always
Keep temporary workdir even on success.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-keep\-temp
Keep temporary workdir on failure.
.SH QUICK TEST OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-skip\-video " , " \-\-skip\-audio " , " \-\-skip\-subs
Disable respective pipelines (useful for quick tests).
.SH FFMPEG OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-ffmpeg\-loglevel " " \fILEVEL\fR
Set ffmpeg log verbosity (e.g., quiet, error, warning, info). Default: error.
.TP
.BR \-\-ffprobe\-loglevel " " \fILEVEL\fR
Set ffprobe log verbosity. Default: error.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-hide\-banner
Show the ffmpeg/ffprobe startup banner (hidden by default).
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-overwrite
Do not overwrite existing intermediate files (ffmpeg overwrites by default).
.TP
.BR \-\-replace\-source
Replace the original source file with the encoded output. Prompts for
confirmation before proceeding. Requires an interactive terminal (stdin
must be a TTY); in non\-interactive shells (scripts, pipelines), this flag
is rejected with an error directing you to use
.BR \-\-force\-replace\-source .
.TP
.BR \-\-force\-replace\-source
Replace the original source file with the encoded output without prompting
for confirmation. This is the scripting\-friendly variant of
.BR \-\-replace\-source .
.TP
.BR \-\-remove\-source
Remove the original source file after a successful encode. Prompts for
confirmation before proceeding. Requires an interactive terminal (stdin
must be a TTY); in non\-interactive shells (scripts, pipelines), this flag
is rejected with an error directing you to use
.BR \-\-force\-remove\-source .
.TP
.BR \-\-force\-remove\-source
Remove the original source file after a successful encode without prompting
for confirmation. This is the scripting\-friendly variant of
.BR \-\-remove\-source .
.PP
.B Source collision auto\-versioning:
When the derived output path matches the source file and neither
.B \-\-replace\-source
nor
.B \-\-force\-replace\-source
is given, muxm automatically appends a version number to avoid collision:
.IR movie(1).mp4 ", " movie(2).mp4 ,
etc.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B muxm Movie.mkv
Encode using default settings (no profile). Output name is
derived from input. Use \fB\-\-profile\fR for device\-optimized settings.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile atv\-directplay\-hq Movie.mkv
Encode for Apple TV direct play with Dolby Vision P8.1, E\-AC\-3 surround,
AAC stereo fallback, and burned forced subtitles.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile streaming \-\-audio\-lang\-pref spa,eng Movie.mkv
Encode for Plex/Jellyfin streaming, preferring Spanish audio over English.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile dv\-archival Movie.mkv
Archival remux: copy video/audio without re\-encoding, preserve Dolby Vision
and lossless audio. Skips the file if it already matches.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile animation \-\-crf 14 Anime.mkv
Anime encode with animation\-tuned x265, overriding the profile's CRF 16
down to 14 for higher quality.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile universal Movie.mkv
Maximum compatibility: tone\-map HDR to SDR, H.264, AAC stereo, burned
forced subs. Plays on virtually any device.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-crf 18 \-p slow \-\-no\-subtitles Movie.mkv out.mp4
Custom encode without any profile: CRF 18, slow preset, strip all
subtitles, explicit output filename.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile hdr10\-hq \-\-audio\-lossless\-passthrough Movie.mkv
HDR10 encode keeping lossless audio (TrueHD/DTS\-HD MA) passed through
instead of transcoding.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-dry\-run \-\-profile streaming Movie.mkv
Preview what muxm would do without actually encoding. Creates placeholder
files and prints the planned pipeline.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-profile atv\-directplay\-hq \-\-print\-effective\-config
Show every resolved setting after config files and profile merge, then exit.
Useful for debugging config precedence.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-create\-config user streaming
Generate a ~/.muxmrc pre\-filled with streaming profile defaults. Edit to
taste; CLI flags still override everything.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-setup
Full first\-time setup: install dependencies, the manual page, and tab
completion all at once.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-install\-dependencies
Check for and install all required/optional tools (ffmpeg, dovi_tool,
pgsrip, etc.) via Homebrew and pipx.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-install\-man
Install this manual page so \fBman muxm\fR works.
.TP
.B muxm \-\-install\-completions
Install bash/zsh tab completion. Adds a source line to your shell RC files.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error (config write failure, dependency check failure, unhandled runtime error).
.TP
.B 10
Missing required tool (ffmpeg, ffprobe, or jq not found).
.TP
.B 11
Invalid arguments, unknown option or profile, bad input/output path, or security
check failure (control characters in filename, source/output collision).
.TP
.B 12
Source file unusable: no video streams, corrupt metadata, or ffprobe JSON parse failure.
.TP
.B 40
Video encode or Dolby Vision RPU extraction/validation failure (with fallback disabled).
.TP
.B 41
DV RPU injection failure, intermediate file validation failure, or final mux failure.
.TP
.B 42
Video pipeline structural error (e.g., \-\-skip\-video with no alternative, missing
or corrupt encoded video stream).
.TP
.B 43
Audio transcode or copy failure.
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by user (SIGINT / Ctrl\-C).
.TP
.B 143
Terminated by signal (SIGTERM).
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI/etc/.muxmrc\fR
System\-wide configuration (sourced first).
.TP
\fI~/.muxmrc\fR
Per\-user configuration (sourced second).
.TP
\fI./.muxmrc\fR
Per\-project configuration (sourced last, from
.BR $PWD ).
.PP
Configuration files use shell variable syntax and are sourced as bash
scripts. CLI flags always override config files. Profiles override
config files but are overridden by CLI flags.
.TP
\fI~/.muxm/muxm\-completion.bash\fR
Tab\-completion script installed by \fB\-\-install\-completions\fR.
.SH CONFIGURATION
All behavior can be tuned via shell variables set in
.I .muxmrc
files. Run
.B muxm \-\-create\-config user
to generate a fully\-commented template at
.I ~/.muxmrc
with every variable documented and preset for a chosen profile.
Variables set by the selected profile are uncommented; all others are
commented with their defaults.
.PP
Major variable groups:
.TP
.B Video
.BR CRF_VALUE ", " PRESET_VALUE ", " VIDEO_CODEC ", " X265_PARAMS_BASE ", "
.BR LEVEL_VALUE ", " CONSERVATIVE_VBV ", " FORCE_CHROMA_420 ", "
.BR SDR_USE_10BIT_IF_SRC_10BIT ", " SDR_FORCE_10BIT ", "
.BR HDR_TARGET_PIXFMT ", " MAX_COPY_BITRATE ", "
.BR TONEMAP_HDR_TO_SDR ", " TONEMAP_FILTER .
.TP
.B Dolby Vision
.BR DISABLE_DV ", " ALLOW_DV_FALLBACK ", " DV_CONVERT_TO_P81_IF_FAIL .
.TP
.B Audio
.BR AUDIO_LANG_PREF ", " AUDIO_CODEC_PREFERENCE ", "
.BR AUDIO_TRACK_OVERRIDE ", " AUDIO_FORCE_CODEC ", "
.BR MAX_AUDIO_CHANNELS ", " ADD_STEREO_IF_MULTICH ", "
.BR STEREO_BITRATE ", " EAC3_BITRATE_5_1 ", " EAC3_BITRATE_7_1 ", "
.BR AUDIO_LOSSLESS_PASSTHROUGH ", " INCLUDE_AUDIO_TITLES .
.TP
.B Audio scoring
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_LANG_BONUS ", " AUDIO_SCORE_CHANNEL_MULTIPLIER ", "
.BR AUDIO_SCORE_SURROUND_BONUS ", " AUDIO_SCORE_COMMENTARY_PENALTY .
.TP
.B Multi\-track audio (archival)
.BR AUDIO_MULTI_TRACK ", " AUDIO_KEEP_COMMENTARY .
.TP
.B Subtitles
.BR SUB_LANG_PREF ", " SUB_INCLUDE_FORCED ", " SUB_INCLUDE_FULL ", "
.BR SUB_INCLUDE_SDH ", " SUB_MAX_TRACKS ", " SUB_CLEAR_DEFAULT ", "
.BR SUB_BURN_FORCED ", " SUB_EXPORT_EXTERNAL ", "
.BR SUB_PRESERVE_TEXT_FORMAT ", " SUB_ENABLE_OCR ", "
.BR SUB_OCR_TOOL ", " SUB_OCR_LANG .
.TP
.B Multi\-track subtitles (archival)
.BR SUB_MULTI_TRACK .
.TP
.B Output / operational
.BR OUTPUT_EXT ", " KEEP_CHAPTERS ", " STRIP_METADATA ", "
.BR SKIP_IF_IDEAL ", " REPORT_JSON ", " CHECKSUM ", "
.BR DISK_FREE_WARN_GB " (default\ 5; warn when free space is below this many GB),"
.BR TAG_LANGUAGE_DEFAULT .
.TP
.B ffmpeg / ffprobe
.BR FFMPEG_LOGLEVEL ", " FFPROBE_LOGLEVEL ", " FFMPEG_HIDE_BANNER ", "
.BR FFMPEG_OVERWRITE ", " THREADS .
.TP
.B VBV guardrails
.BR LEVEL_VBV_4_1_MAXRATE ", " LEVEL_VBV_4_1_BUFSIZE ", "
.BR LEVEL_VBV_5_0_MAXRATE ", " LEVEL_VBV_5_0_BUFSIZE ", "
.BR LEVEL_VBV_5_1_MAXRATE ", " LEVEL_VBV_5_1_BUFSIZE ", "
.BR LEVEL_VBV_5_2_MAXRATE ", " LEVEL_VBV_5_2_BUFSIZE .
.PP
Use
.B \-\-print\-effective\-config
to inspect the fully\-resolved configuration after all layers merge.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DEBUG
Set to
.B 1
to enable bash trace output
.RB ( "set \-x" )
and suppress automatic temp\-directory cleanup. Useful for diagnosing
pipeline failures.
.TP
.B TESSDATA_PREFIX
Path to Tesseract OCR language data. Required by
.B pgsrip
for PGS subtitle OCR. Typically set to the Homebrew tessdata directory
(e.g.,
.IR /opt/homebrew/share/tessdata ).
Run
.B muxm \-\-install\-dependencies
to check and configure.
.SH NOTES
.SS Security: .muxmrc sourcing
Configuration files are sourced as shell scripts and can execute
arbitrary code. The project\-level
.I ./.muxmrc
is sourced from
.BR $PWD ,
so a malicious file placed in a directory you
.B cd
into could run arbitrary commands. This follows the same trust model as
.BR Makefile ", " .envrc " (direnv),"
and similar developer tooling. Only source project\-level configs in
directories you trust.
.SS Double\-dash separator
Use
.B \-\-
to mark the end of options. This is necessary when the source filename
begins with a hyphen:
.IP
.B muxm \-\-profile streaming \-\- \-unusual\-name.mkv
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B Required
\fBffmpeg\fR, \fBffprobe\fR \(em core encoding and media inspection.
.br
\fBjq\fR \(em JSON parsing for stream metadata and reporting.
.br
\fBbc\fR \(em arithmetic evaluation for frame\-rate and bitrate calculations.
.TP
.B Optional
\fBffmpeg with libass\fR (\fBffmpeg\-full\fR on Homebrew) \(em required for
subtitle burn\-in via \fB\-\-sub\-burn\-forced\fR. The standard \fBffmpeg\fR
package works for all other features.
.br
\fBdovi_tool\fR \(em Dolby Vision RPU extraction/injection. DV handling is
automatically disabled if missing.
.br
\fBMP4Box\fR (gpac) \(em DV container\-level signaling verification.
Detected at runtime as \fBmp4box\fR or \fBMP4Box\fR.
.br
\fBtesseract\fR \(em OCR engine required by \fBpgsrip\fR for PGS bitmap
subtitle conversion.
.br
\fBpgsrip\fR or \fBsub2srt\fR \(em PGS bitmap subtitle OCR to SRT.
Configurable via \fB\-\-ocr\-tool\fR.
.PP
Run \fBmuxm \-\-install\-dependencies\fR to check for and install all
tools via Homebrew and pipx.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ffmpeg (1),
.BR ffprobe (1),
.BR dovi_tool (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR MP4Box (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/TheBluWiz/MuxMaster/issues
.UE .
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025\(en2026 Jamey Wicklund (theBluWiz).
.PP
MuxMaster\(tm Freeware License v1.0.1 \(em
\(lqDo what you want, just don't pretend I warranty the universe.\(rq
.SH AUTHOR
Jamey Wicklund (theBluWiz).
